*****************************
ProkFunAnnotate
*****************************

The ProkFunAnnotate snakemake pipeline can be used to genreate the annotation
data used by ProkFunFind. This pipeline is available in a snakemake pipeline
here:  https://github.com/nlm-irp-jianglab/ProkFunAnnotate

The following tutorial section will provide a walkthrough on how to generate
annotation files for a genome using the PFA pipeline.

Example Data
############
The genome used in this tutorial is contained in the ./pfa-genomes/ directory
of the prokfunfind-tutorial repository. The input file is the './pfa-list.tsv'
file.

To get started using the annotation pipeline you are going to want to clone
a copy of the scripts using the following command:

.. code-block::

  git clone https://github.com/nlm-irp-jianglab/ProkFunAnnotate.git

This will make a directory called ProkFunAnnotate which contains the associated
snakemake files.

Downloading the Annotation Data
*******************************
Both EggNog-mapper and KOFamScan require annotation databases to run their
annotation functions on a new genome. These databases can be downloaded
manually following the directions in the two programs respective manuals or
they can be downloaded using the download_snakemake snakemake pipeline provided
in the repository.

The following command can be used to automatically download the files and
store them in a designated data folder:

.. code-block::

  snakemake -s  ./ProkFunAnnotate/download_snakemake --use-singularity \
  --cores 4 --config "data_dir=data"

The data_dir=data argument provided to the snakemake command designates
what output directory the downloaded database files will be stored in.
In this case it is a directory called 'data/'.

The --use singularity option tells the snakemake pipeline to use singularity
to run a designated image that contains EggNog-mapper and KOFamScan preinstalled.
This gives us access to the accessory scripts to download and format the data
without having the programs installed globally on the computer.

The first time running this command might take a few extra minutes
to download and launch the singularity image, but subsequent
runs of this script and of the annotation script will be able to use
the downloaded image without redownloading it.

This command will make a directory called 'data/' that contains two
subdirectories one called egg_data/ that stores the EGGNog-mapper database
and one called kofam_data/ that contains the KOFamScan database files.

Running the Annotation Pipeline from Genome Fasta Files
********************************************************
To run the annotation pipeline you first need a genome or set of genomes that
you want to run the annotaitons on. These genomes are expected to be in
fasta format with the file extension '.fna'. For this test a genome file
is provided in the ./pfa-genomes/GTDB26128.fna

An input file used to run the annotation pipeline can be found in the
'./pfa-list.tsv' file. This file is setup to run the annotation pipeline on the
one genome stored in the ./pfa-genomes/ directory.

.. code-block::

  GTDB26128       pfa-genomes/

To run the annotation script the following command can be used:

.. code-block:: shell

  snakemake -s ./annotate_snakemake --core 32 --use-singularity \
  --singularity-args "\-B ./data/egg_data/:/opt/egg_data/,./data/kofam_data/:/opt/kofam_data/" \
  --config "genomes=./genome_list.tsv" --latency-wait 10

This command will launch the snakemake pipeline which will peform the following steps:
1. Predict the gene content using PROKKA
2. Annotate the genes using EGGNog-mapper
3. Annotate the genes using KOFamScan

After the pipeline is finished there will be a 5 new files in the directory
containing the genome file. A '.faa' file containing the predicted protein sequences,
a '.gff' file containing the predicted gene locations, a '.emapper.tsv' file
containing the EGGNog-mapper annotations, a '.kofam.tsv' file containing the
KOFamScan annotations, and a '.prokka.tsv' file that contains the annotations
generated by the Prokka program itself. A new subdirectory named after the genomes 
will also be generated that contains additional files generated by PROKKA during the
gene prediction process. 


Running the Annotation Pipeline from Genbank file and Genome Fasta File
************************************************************************
The ProkFunFind annotaiton pipeline can also be run using a genbank file
and a genome fasta file similar to the ones that can be downloaded for any 
genome in the NCBI Genbank database. For example the files associated with the 
genome here: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NZ_CP029205.1

The downloaded fasta file should contain the genome contig fasta sequences, and
have the extension '.fasta' (the default extension when downloading a fasta file
from Genbank). The Genbank file should have the extension '.gb' (the default extension
when downloading a genbank file from Genbank)

The rest of the input is the same as running the pipeline on just a genome fasta file
and the output will be the same. the only difference is taht the snakemake pipeline should
be run with the annotate_gb_snakemake instead of annotate_snakemake snakemake file.